# MIP114: The Governance Security Scope Framework

## Preamble
```
MIP#: 114
Title: The Governance Security Scope Framework
Author(s): @rune
Contributors:
Tags: endgame, scope-framework
Type: General
Status: Accepted
Date Proposed: 2023-02-06
Date Ratified: 2023-03-27
Dependencies:
Replaces:
Ratification Poll URL: https://vote.makerdao.com/polling/Qmbndmkr
Forum URL: https://forum.makerdao.com/t/mip114-the-governance-security-scope-framework/19701
```

## Sentence Summary

The Governance Security Scope Framework provides the core principles, rules and regulation regarding Governance security in the Endgame.

## Paragraph Summary

MIP114 establishes the Governance Security Scope Framework. The Governance Security Scope Framework covers the requirements and processes related to securely deploying executive votes and exposing them in governance frontends.. All rules for Governance security for the DAO are contained in this framework, including the procedures of the Governance Security Scope Framework Advisory Council.

## Component Summary

**MIP114c1: Preamble**  
Contains the Preamble to the Governance Security Scope Framework.

**MIP114c2: Scope Framework Articles**  
Contains the Scope Framework Articles for the Governance Security Scope Framework.

**MIP114c3: Responsible Facilitators**  
Contains details on the Responsible Facilitators for the Governance Security Scope Framework.

**MIP114c4: Scope Framework Articles Modification Subproposal Process**  
Contains details of how the Governance Security Scope Framework can be amended.

## Motivation

The Governance Security Scope Framework is necessary to define the Scope as per the Maker Constitution.

## Specification

### MIP114c1: Preamble

The Governance Security Scope Framework covers the requirements and processes related to securely deploying executive votes and exposing them in governance frontends.

### MIP114c2: Scope Framework Articles

#### 1: The Governance Security Advisory Council

##### 1.1: The Governance Security Advisory Council definition
The Governance Security Advisory Council is a group of Governance Security Actors that have been approved by Maker Governance to carry out advisory work related to improving the content of the Governance Security Scope Framework.

##### 1.2: Governance Security Advisory Council membership management
Members of the Advisory Council are directly approved by Maker Governance through a governance poll, and must fulfill specific criteria.
* **1.2.1:** The Responsible Facilitators must ensure that potential Advisory Council Members can apply to be approved by Maker Governance, using an open process with clear instructions.
---
* **1.2.2:** Advisory Council Members must be Governance Security actors that are not involved in any business activity that could result in a conflict of interest, either directly or indirectly. They must also have relevant skills for providing professional expert input on the content that the Governance Security Scope is covering.
---
* **1.2.3:** The Responsible Facilitators must periodically, when it is relevant, review the Advisory Council Applications, and if they find applications that are suitable, bring them to a vote through an MKR governance poll. Approved Advisory Council Members are added to **10.2.3.1:**.
---
* **1.2.4:** The Responsible Facilitators may, if they deem it necessary, hold a vote to remove an Advisory Council Member. If an Advisory Council Member has not done any paid work for the Scope for at least 1 year, then the Responsible Facilitators can choose to remove them at will, if they deem it necessary.
---
* **1.2.5:** The current approved Advisory Council Members are recorded in the soft element **1.2.5.1**.
	* **1.2.5.1:**

    ¤¤¤
	
    Current list of Advisory Council Members:
      * N/A
	  
    ¤¤¤

##### 1.3: Governance Security Advisory Council projects and funding
The Advisory Council is paid on a project basis to do specific work that improves all or specific parts of the Scope Framework.
* **1.3.1:** Each Quarter, if they deem it necessary, the Responsible Facilitators must solicit proposals and find one or more suitable Advisory Council Members to perform a project that will result in output that can be used to improve the Scope Framework. This work output will be presented to the CVC Subcommittee Meetings as the starting point for the CVC Scope Framework Position Documents. As many CVCs as possible should be supported this way, prioritized by the Responsible Facilitators.
---
* **1.3.2:** In case an ambiguous, uncertain or challenging situation arises related to the Scope Framework, the Responsible Facilitator may approach one or more Advisory Council Members to perform a reactive project that aims to specify the language of the Scope Framework to take into account the specific situation. The Responsible Facilitator can then directly propose the change to the Scope Framework in a weekly governance poll, quickly resolving the challenge.
---
* **1.3.3:** The Advisory Council may not produce work output that is directly compatible with the formatting of the Scope Framework. In this case the Responsible Facilitator must either transcribe it themselves, or hire an Ecosystem Actor to perform the transcription. This role does not require preapproval by Maker Governance.
---
* **1.3.4:** The Responsible Facilitators may also produce advisory input on the content of the Scope Framework themselves, as long as it is focused on improving process and governance content. They are prohibited from providing unilateral input on expert subject matter content.
---
* **1.3.5:** The Responsible Facilitators have a budget available to pay for Advisory Council Projects per quarter. All spending must be limited to only what is deemed necessary and with a high probability of producing clearly measurable value, and this must be transparently be accounted for in a forum post at least a week before any transaction occurs.
	* **1.3.5.1:**
    
	¤¤¤

    The Advisory Council project budget is as follows:

    | Quarterly Budget (DAI) | Method of Distribution | Maximum Limit (DAI) |
    |---|---|---|
    | 0 | Keg - streamed at a linear rate over 3 months | 0 |

    ¤¤¤

#### 2: The Implementation of the Governance Security Scope Framework through Software
The Responsible Facilitators must in collaboration with the CVC Subcommittees, periodically review possibilities of integrating DAO toolkit innovation into the processes and content of the Scope Framework.

#### 3: Governance Security Responsibility

##### 3.1: Governance Security Responsibility
PECU is responsible for deploying spells and other matters related to Governance Security.

### MIP114c3: Responsible Facilitators

The Responsible Facilitators of the Governance Security Scope Framework are defined in MIP113c2.6.1.2.1A.

### MIP114c4: Scope Framework Articles Modification Subproposal Process

During the Pregame the Scope Framework articles can be modified through the Monthly Governance Cycle using a MIP102c2 subproposal.

