# MIP102c2-SP33: MIP102 Amendment

## Preamble

```
MIP102c2-SP#: 33
MIP to be amended: MIP102
Author(s): @ldr
Contributors: @JanSky, @blimpa
General Edit or Article 1 Edit: General
Tags: 
Status: RFC
Date Proposed: 2024-03-06
Date Ratified: <yyyy-mm-dd>
Forum URL: https://forum.makerdao.com/t/mip102c2-sp33-mip-102-amendment/23792
```

## Specification

### Motivation

The Governance Facilitator teams have observed a rising number of proposals containing logic intended to block other proposals editing the same section of a MIP or Scope Artifact ([Example 1](https://forum.makerdao.com/t/mip102c2-spxx-mip-amendment-subproposals/23672#amended-mips-and-components-4), [Example 2](https://forum.makerdao.com/t/mip102c2-sp26-mip-amendment-subproposal/23348#amended-mips-and-components-5)) within the same Governance Cycle. This type of blocking language undermines effective governance by preventing voters from selecting their preferred option in the event that there are opposing amendments. Simultaneously, there is a risk of a stalemate situation where two or more proposals seeking to edit the same component contain such blocking language, making it logically impossible for either to be ratified.

This proposal introduces language that will:

* Ban the use of such blocking language in MIP102c2 subproposals.
* Authorize Governance Facilitators to streamline and merge non-conflicting proposals editing the same component.
    * For example, simultaneous subproposals may edit the same component in ways that do not conflict. These scenarios could be easily solved by combining the logic of both proposals, or by changing numbering without the need for further governance overhead.
* Specify a polling process to decide the preferred option of voters in the event two conflicting proposals pass within the same Governance Cycle.

### Amended MIPs and Components

- MIP102
    - Amends MIP102c2
    - Adds MIP102c4

### Amendment Pull Request

- https://github.com/makerdao/mips/pull/1064