# Protocol DAI Transfer

## Preamble
```
MIP#: X
Title: Protocol DAI Transfer
Author(s): @LongForWisdom
Contributors: N/A
Type: Process
Status: <Assigned by MIP Editor>
Date Proposed: <yyyy-mm-dd>
Date Ratified: <yyyy-mm-dd>
Dependencies: MIP0
Replaces: N/A
```
## References
**[MIPXc2-Subproposal-Template.md](MIPXc2-Subproposal-Template.md)**

## Sentence Summary

MIPX defines a generic process for transfering DAI from the Maker Protocol to a target ethereum address.

## Paragraph Summary

MIPX defines a generic process for transfering DAI from the Maker Protocol to a target ethereum address. This process is a fallback method of transferring value from the protocol in the event that a more specific process does not exist to do so. 

## Component Summary

**MIPXc1: Considerations Regarding Protocol DAI Transfers**  
A component which outlines the various considerations that should be made before transferring DAI out of the protocol using MIPXc2.

**MIPXc2: Protocol DAI Transfer Process**  
A process component that allows Maker Governance to transfer DAI from the Maker Protocol to a target ethereum address.

**MIPXc3: Protocol DAI Transfer List**  
A list component that lists the previous direct DAI transfers that have been made by the protocol in the past.


## Motivation

Giving governance the ability to use the value generated by the Maker Protocol is beneficial for two main reasons:
- It allows Maker Governance to incentivise actions taken to improve the protocol.
- It reduces Maker Governance's reliance on the Maker Foundation.

Both of these should be seen as beneficial for fairly obvious reasons. Less reliance on the Foundation moves the protocol towards decentralization. Creating a process to allow Maker Governance to spend the value accrued by the protocol empowers Maker Governance to build and improve the protocol in the future.

## Specification / Proposal Details

**MIPXc1: Considerations Regarding Protocol DAI Transfers**  
There are several important considerations to take into account before transferring value out of the Maker Protocol.
- Transfer of DAI from the protocol to an external address that is not controlled by Maker Governance is a one-way operation.
- Transfer of DAI from the protocol will take DAI from the surplus buffer if available.
- Transfer of DAI from the protocol will create bad debt and trigger FLOP auctions after the Debt auction delay (wait parameter) if there is not sufficient DAI available in the surplus buffer.
- If there is a more specific process MIP that allows DAI transfers that is more appropriate to the use case, use that process instead.

---

**MIPXc2: Protocol DAI Transfer Process**  
MIPXc2 is a Process MIP component that allows Maker Governance to transfer DAI from the Maker Protocol to a target ethereum address. Note that MIPXc2 subproposals are technical subproposals, they define executive code that transfers DAI from the Maker Protocol to one or more target addresses.

If a MIPXc2 subproposal is Accepted, The DAI Transfer is appended to the list in MIPXc3 by a MIP Editor.

MIPXc2 subproposals have parameters that depend on the total amount of DAI to be transferred (even if split among multipe target addresses) according to the following logic:

**< 10,000 DAI Transfer**
- **Feedback Period:** 0 full weeks
- **Frozen period:** 0 full weeks

**10,000 - 100,000 DAI Transfer**
- **Feedback Period:** 4 full weeks
- **Frozen period:** 1 full week

**> 100,000 DAI Transfer**
- **Feedback Period:** 12 full weeks
- **Frozen period:** 4 full weeks

MIPXc2 subproposals must use the template located at **[MIPXc2-Subproposal-Template.md](MIPXc2-Subproposal-Template.md)**. This template is considered ratified once this MIP moves to Accepted status.

---

**MIPXc3: Protocol DAI Transfer List**  
This list can be amended through subproposals created under MIPXc2.

**List Entry Template**
Entries into this list should follow the following template:

```
Reason:
Sub-proposal Number: #
Date Ratified: (yyyy-mm-dd)
Amount Transferred:
Recipient Address:
```

**Historical Transfer List**
There are currently no historical transfers. Below is an example transfer which should be removed (as should this paragraph) when the first ratified transfer is added to this list .

```
Reason: Funding Chocolate for Governance Facilitators
Sub-proposal Number: MIPXc1-SP0
Date Ratified: 2020-02-30
Amount Transferred: 1,000,000 DAI
Recipient Address: 0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000
```

---
