# MIP103: The Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework

## Preamble
```
MIP#: 103
Title: The Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework
Author(s): @rune
Contributors:
Tags: endgame, scope-framework, constitution-mip-set
Type: General
Status: Accepted
Date Proposed: 2023-02-06
Date Ratified: 2023-03-27
Dependencies:
Replaces:
Ratification Poll URL: https://vote.makerdao.com/polling/Qmbndmkr
Forum URL: https://forum.makerdao.com/t/mip103-the-stability-and-liquidity-scope-framework/19675
```

## Sentence Summary

The Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework provides the core principles, rules and regulation regarding Dai stability, peg and the liquidity and minimum returns of collateral.

## Paragraph Summary

MIP103 establishes the Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework. This includes Asset Liability management and Dai Savings Rate and Stability Fee Base Rate adjustments. All rules for Stability and Liquidity for the DAO are contained in this framework, including the procedures of the The Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework Advisory Council.

## Component Summary

**MIP103c1: Preamble**  
Contains the Preamble to the Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework.

**MIP103c2: Scope Framework Articles**  
Contains the Scope Framework Articles for the Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework.

**MIP103c3: Responsible Facilitators**  
Contains details on the Responsible Facilitators for the Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework.

**MIP103c4: Scope Framework Articles Modification Subproposal Process**  
Contains details of how the Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework can be amended.

## Motivation

The Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework is necessary to define the Scope as per the Maker Constitution.

## Specification

### MIP103c1: Preamble

The Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework provides the core principles, rules and regulation regarding Dai stability, peg and the liquidity and minimum returns of collateral. This includes Asset Liability management and Dai Savings Rate and Stability Fee Base Rate adjustments.

### MIP103c2: Scope Framework Articles

#### 1: The Stability and Liquidity Advisory Council

##### 1.1: The Stability and Liquidity Advisory Council definition
The Stability and Liquidity Advisory Council is a group of Ecosystem Actors that have been approved by Maker Governance to carry out advisory work related to improving the content of the Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework.

##### 1.2: Stability and Liquidity Advisory Council membership management
Members of the Advisory Council are directly approved by Maker Governance through a governance poll, and must fulfil specific criteria.
* **1.2.1:** The Responsible Facilitators must ensure that potential Advisory Council Members can apply to be approved by Maker Governance, using an open process with clear instructions.
---
* **1.2.2:** Advisory Council Members must be ecosystem actors that are not involved in any business activity that could result in a conflict of interest, either directly or indirectly. They must also have relevant skills for providing professional expert input on the content that the Stability and Liquidity Scope is covering.
---
* **1.2.3:** The Responsible Facilitators must periodically, when it is relevant, review the Advisory Council Applications, and if they find applications that are suitable, bring them to a vote through an MKR governance poll. Approved Advisory Council Members are added to **10.2.3.1:**.
---
* **1.2.4:** The Responsible Facilitators may, if they deem it necessary, hold a vote to remove an Advisory Council Member. If an Advisory Council Member has not done any paid work for the Scope for at least 1 year, then the Responsible Facilitators can choose to remove them at will, if they deem it necessary.
---
* **1.2.5:** The current approved Avisory Council Members are recorded in the Active element *1.2.5.1A*.
  * **1.2.5.1A:**
	
    ¤¤¤

    Current list of Advisory Council Members:
      * N/A

    ¤¤¤

##### 1.3: Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework Advisory Council projects and funding
The Advisory Council is paid on a project basis to do specific work that improves all or specific parts of the Scope Framework.
* **1.3.1:** Each Quarter, if they deem it necessary, the Responsible Facilitators must solicit proposals and find one or more suitable Advisory Council Members to perform a project that will result in output that can be used to improve the Scope Framework. This work output will be presented to the CVC Subcommittee Meetings as the starting point for the CVC Scope Framework Position Documents. As many CVCs as possible should be supported this way, prioritized by the Responsible Facilitators.
---
* **1.3.2:** In case an ambiguous, uncertain or challenging situation arises related to the Scope Framework, the Responsible Facilitator may approach one or more Advisory Council Members to perform a reactive project that aims to specify the language of the Scope Framework to take into account the specific situation. The Responsible Facilitator can then directly propose the change to the Scope Framework in a weekly governance poll, quickly resolving the challenge.
---
* **1.3.3:** The Advisory Council may not produce work output that is directly compatible with the formatting of the Scope Framework. In this case the Responsible Facilitator must either transcribe it themselves, or hire an Ecosystem Actor to perform the transcribtion. This role does not require preapproval by Maker Governance.
---
* **1.3.4:** The Responsible Facilitators may also produce advisory input on the content of the Scope Framework themselves, as long as it is focused on improving process and governance content. They are prohibited from providing unilateral input on expert subject matter content.
---
* **1.3.5:** The Responsible Facilitators have a budget available to pay for Advisory Council Projects per quarter. All spending must be limited to only what is deemed necessary and with a high probability of producing clearly measurable value, and this must be transparently be accounted for in a forum post at least a week before any transaction occurs. The budget implementation is specified in *1.3.5.1A*. The budget implementation Active Element can be modified using the standard CVC Scope Framework modification process, or through the Responsible Facilitators proposing a modification through a weekly cycle governance poll.
  * **1.3.5.1A:**
	
    ¤¤¤

    The Advisory Council project budget is as follows:

    | Quarterly Budget (DAI) | Method of Distribution | Maximum Limit (DAI) |
    |---|---|---|
    | 500,000 | Keg - streamed at a linear rate over 3 months | 500,000 |

    ¤¤¤

#### 2: The Implementation of the Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework through Software

The Responsible Facilitators must in collaboration with the CVC Subcommittees, periodically review possibilities of integrating DAO toolkit innovation into the processes and content of the Scope Framework.

#### 3: The general Asset-Liability Management model

##### 3.1: The general Asset-Liability Management model definition
The ALM model governs the overall duration risk of the Dai collateral portfolio, and its contents are implemented practically in the Decentralized Collateral Scope Framework and the Real World Asset Scope Framework. The high level requirements specified in the sections act as the boundaries for how the Dai collateral portfolio must behave. Broadly, there are two categories of collateral in the Asset-Liability Management model: Stability Collateral, and Yield Collateral. Stability collateral are stablecoins and highly scalable and liquid assets that are used directly by the Maker Protocol to support the Dai peg and the Dai Savings Rate in the market place, while Yield Collateral are low risk, but less liquid assets used to generate yield above the Dai Savings Rate as surplus for the Maker Protocol.

##### 3.2: ALM Rules for Stability Collateral
Stability Collateral covers a few types of stablecoins and RWA exposure that the Maker Protocol interacts directly with, based on the exact specifications provided in this section. The purpose of Stability Collateral is to directly enforce the Dai peg in the market place, and to provide very low risk, scalable collateral deployment opportunities that enable the Maker Protocol to maintain the Dai Savings Rate regardless of the level of incoming Dai demand.
* **3.2.1:** Cash Stablecoins are stablecoins that have very high liquidity and are used as a direct target for the Dai peg. As a result the Maker Protocol must maintain a large amount of Cash Stablecoins available for direct on-chain exchange with Dai for minimal fees or spread.
   * **3.2.1.1:** The ALM model targets an exposure to Cash Stablecoins equivalent to 10% of the Dai Collateral Portfolio.
---
* **3.2.2:** Liquid Reserve Collateral is scalable collateral that can be converted to Cash Stablecoins within a short amount of time, and at very large throughput, while generating a yield.
   * **3.2.2.1:** When exposure to Cash Stablecoins is in excess of the exposure target defined in  *3.2.1.1*, the excess Cash Stablecoins must be converted to Liquid Reserve Collateral through an automated smart contract.
   * **3.2.2.2:** When exposure to Cash Stablecoins is below the exposure target defined in *3.2.1.1*  any available Liquid Reserve Collateral must be converted to Cash Stablecoins at a high throughput based on an automated smart contract.
---
* **3.2.3:** The Stability Collateral Benchmark Yield is equivalent to the average yield, weighted proportionally to target relative exposure, of the Liquid Reserve Collateral.
---
* **3.2.4:** Incubating Stablecoins are stablecoins that do not have enough liquidity to serve as Cash Stablecoins, but are strategically selected for incubation and subsidy through direct exposure as Stability Collateral in order to promote their adoption and maintain them as potential fallback solutions in case of risk to the Cash Stablecoins.
   * **3.2.4.1:** Incubating Stablecoins cannot exceed 10% of the Dai Collateral Portfolio, and their exposure must be restricted unless they provide a yield competitive with the Stability Collateral Yield Benchmark.

##### 3.3: ALM rules for Yield Collateral
Yield Collateral is the portion of the Dai Collateral Portfolio that is not directly used to enforce the Dai peg, and can instead be deployed to generate higher yield that results in a surplus to the Maker Protocol. Yield Collateral have multiple tiers broken down based on their duration. The ALM rules are designed so that it is always possible to substitute a longer duration asset with a shorter duration asset.
* **3.3.1:** The ALM model targets an exposure of at most 80% of the Dai Collateral Portfolio to collateral of ALM Tier 1 or higher.
	* **3.3.1.0:** *If all higher tiers are at their targeted exposure, the allocation that is exclusively available for tier 1 collateral is 15%.*
	* **3.3.1.1:** ALM Tier 1 collateral is collateral that can be repaid as Dai within at most 2 weeks when required by the ALM model.
---
* **3.3.2:** The ALM model targets an exposure of at most 65% of the Dai Collateral Portfolio to collateral of ALM Tier 2 or higher.
	* **3.3.2.0:** *If all higher tiers are at their targeted exposure, the allocation that is exclusively available for tier 2 collateral is 15%.*
	* **3.3.2.1:** ALM Tier 2 collateral is collateral that can be repaid as Dai within at most 1 month when required by the ALM model.
---
* **3.3.3:** The ALM model targets an exposure of at most 50% of the Dai Collateral Portfolio to collateral of ALM Tier 3 or higher.
	* **3.3.3.0:** *If all higher tiers are at their targeted exposure, the allocation that is exclusively available for tier 2 collateral is 37.5% of the Effective Dai Collateral Portfolio.*
	* **3.3.3.1:** ALM Tier 3 collateral is collateral that can be repaid as Dai within at most 6 - 12 months, with an average of 9 months, when needed by the ALM model.
---
* **3.3.4:** The ALM model targets an exposure of at most 12.5% of the Dai Collateral Portfolio to collateral of ALM Tier 4 or higher.
	* **3.3.4.0:** *As there are no higher tiers, the allocation that is exclusively available for ALM Tier 4 collateral is 12.5% of the Effective Dai Collateral Portfolio.*
	* **3.3.4.1:** ALM Tier 4 collateral is collateral that can be repaid as Dai within at most 1 - 3 years, with an average of 2 years, when needed by the ALM model.
---
* **3.3.5:** *Yield Collateral Benchmark Yield*. Yield Collateral is highly diverse and is deployed in many different ways. The Yield Collateral Benchmark Yield is a tool for Maker Governance to control the overall risk of Yield Collateral through a single, simple parameter that influences various incentives and rules throughout the Scope Frameworks.
  * **3.3.5.1:** Initially, the Yield Collateral Benchmark Yield is equivalent to the 3-month US Government Treasury Bill.
    * **3.3.5.1.0:** *This element is meant to be improved to become a long term self sustainable, automated algorithm based on both endogenous values and external oracle input over time.*

#### 4: The Dai Savings Rate and Stability Fee Base Rate

##### 4.1: The Dai Savings Rate and Stability Fee Base Rate Definition
The Dai Savings Rate is a yield available to Dai holders that deposit their Dai into the Dai Savings Rate smart contract.  The Stability Fee Base Rate is a global variable that is applied on top of the stability fee of all Variable Rate Core Vaults, and used to fund the Dai Savings Rate.

##### 4.2: The Dai Savings Rate parameter
During normal conditions the Dai Savings Rate is set as 90% of the Stability Collateral Benchmark Yield specified in *3.2.3*.

##### 4.3: Dai Savings Rate and Stability Fee Base Rate changes in demand shocks
In situations where Dai demand rapidly falls and the Maker Protocol runs low on Stability Collateral, the Dai Savings Rate and Stability Fee Base Rate starts increasing.
* **4.3.1:** For each consecutive period where the direct exposure to Cash Stablecoins has continuously been below 5% of the total Effective Dai Collateral Portfolio, the Responsible Facilitator can trigger an urgent executive vote to increase the Stability Fee Base Rate by up to 0.5% per consecutive 24 hour period, up to a maximum of 4%. This also increases the Dai Savings Rate proportionally, based on the proportion of Variable Rate Core Vault debt compared to the total supply of Dai.
	* **4.3.1.0:** *This is to ensure that the Dai Savings Rate doesn't go above what the Maker Protocol is earning on its collateral on average. Examples:*
		* **4.3.1.0.1:** *If the total Dai supply is 4 billion, and the total Variable Rate Core Vault debt is 1 billion, and an executive vote increases the Stability Fee Base rate by 4%, then the executive vote must also increase the Dai Savings Rate by 1%.*
* **4.3.2:** For each consecutive period where the direct exposure to Cash Stablecoins has continuously been above 5% of the total Effective Dai Collateral Portfolio, the Responsible Facilitator can trigger an urgent executive vote to decrease the Stability Fee Base Rate by up to 1% per consecutive 24 hour period. This also decreases the Dai Savings Rate proportionally, based on the proportion of Core Vault debt compared to the total supply of Dai. If the Stability Fee Base Rate returns to 0%, then the Dai Savings Rate must also return to its value during normal conditions as defined in *4.2.*

#### 5: The long duration asset haircut model and process

##### 5.1: The long duration asset haircut model and process
If the effective Stability Fee of at least one Core Vault user has doubled as a result of a demand shock response as defined in *4.3*, then the Responsible Facilitators may submit a fire sale proposal to Maker Governance, enabling them to consider selling long duration assets at a potential haircut. The expected haircut, and other context including the current risk to the Dai peg, must be clearly explained as a part of the decision making process.

#### 6: Preferential terms for strategic collateral

##### 6.1: Preferential terms for strategic collateral
The Decentralized Collateral Scope Framework and the Real World Asset Scope Framework can designate specific collateral types as strategic collateral. This makes it possible to lower their return to at least equivalent to the Stability Collateral Benchmark Yield defined in *3.2.3*. Any time this is used, it must done to a limited extent, and with clear justification and strategic goals that must be periodically revisited.

### MIP103c3: Responsible Facilitators

The Responsible Facilitators of the Stability and Liquidity Scope Framework are defined in MIP113c2.6.1.2.1A.

### MIP103c4: Scope Framework Articles Modification Subproposal Process

During the pregame the Scope Framework articles can be modified through the Monthly Governance Cycle using a MIP102c2 subproposal.

