# MIP121: Increase GSM Pause Delay from 48 Hours to 72 Hours

## Preamble

```
MIP#: 121
Title: Increase GSM Pause Delay from 48 hours to 72 hours
Author(s): @prose11
Contributors:
Tags: GSM, Governance, Pause Delay, Timing, Protocol
Type: Governance
Status: Request for Comments (RFC)
Date Proposed: 2023-03-07
Date Ratified: TBD
Dependencies: None
Replaces: None
```

## References

- MakerDAO Governance Security Module documentation: https://docs.makerdao.com/smart-contract-modules/governance-security-module

## Sentence Summary

This MIP proposes to increase the GSM Pause Delay parameter from 48 hours to 72 hours to provide more time for non-malicious MKR holders and users of the Maker Protocol to become aware of and react to a governance attack.

## Paragraph Summary

This MIP proposes to increase the GSM Pause Delay parameter from 48 hours to 72 hours to provide more time for non-malicious MKR holders and users of the Maker Protocol to become aware of and react to a governance attack. The GSM Pause Delay parameter sets the minimum amount of time after an executive vote has passed before changes will come into effect in the Maker Protocol. This proposal seeks to improve the Maker Protocol's security and reduce the risk of governance attacks, by giving MKR holders more time to react to a governance change.

## Component Summary

**MIP121c1: Update via Executive Vote**
This component describes how the Pause Delay will be manualy updated from 48 hours to 72 hours via an executive vote.

## Motivation

This proposal intends to improve the security of the Maker Protocol by providing more time for non-malicious MKR holders and users of the protocol to become aware of and react to a governance attack. 

The longer GSM Pause Delay will give MKR holders and protocol users more time to become aware of and react to governance attacks, but it will also enforce a slower reaction time on Maker Governance as a whole. It will also give a minority of MKR holders more time to cancel a malicious change or gracefully shut down the Maker Protocol using the Emergency Shutdown Module.

In the event of time-critical issues such as extreme market volatility, technical issues in the Maker Protocol, attack on the Oracles, or extreme network congestion, the swiftest response will still require the GSM Pause Delay to pass before the changes go live in the Maker Protocol.

The decision to propose this change is based on the precieved difficulty in responding to an attack within 48 hours. However, even when done for the right reasons, MKR holders should be aware of the burden created by a longer mandated delay.

## Specification / Proposal Details

### MIP121c1: Update via Executive Vote

Upon passage of this MIP, the Governance Facilitators will request the Governance Pause Delay be increased from 48 hours to 72 hours.

The update will be included in the next available executive bundle once approved on the technical end.
