# MIP112: The Finance Scope Framework

## Preamble
```
MIP#: 112
Title: The Finance Scope Framework
Author(s): @rune
Contributors:
Tags:
Type: General
Status: RFC
Date Proposed: 2023-02-06
Date Ratified:
Dependencies:
Replaces:
Forum URL: https://forum.makerdao.com/t/mip112-the-finance-scope-framework/19699
Ratification Poll URL: 
```

## Sentence Summary

The Finance Scope Framework provides the core principles, rules and regulation regarding Finance in the Endgame.

## Paragraph Summary

MIP112 establishes the Finance Scope Framework. This includes content related to the internal finance of the Maker Protocol and the Maker Ecosystem, including key financial parameters and financial reporting and transparency. All rules for Finance for the DAO are contained in this framework, including the procedures of the Finance Scope Framework Advisory Council.

## Component Summary

**MIP109c1: Preamble**  
Contains the Preamble to the Finance Scope Framework.

**MIP109c2: Scope Framework Articles**  
Contains the Scope Framework Articles for the Finance Scope Framework.

**MIP109c3: Responsible Facilitators**  
Contains details on the Responsible Facilitators for the Finance Scope Framework.

**MIP109c4: Scope Framework Articles Modification Subproposal Process**  
Contains details of how the Finance Scope Framework can be amended.

## Motivation

The Finance Scope Framework is necessary to define the Scope as per the Maker Constitution.

## Specification

### MIP112c1: Preamble

The Finance Scope Framework covers content related to the internal finance of the Maker Protocol and the Maker Ecosystem, including key financial parameters and financial reporting and transparency. 

### MIP112c2: Scope Framework Articles

#### 0: Definitions

##### TODO

#### 1: The Finance Advisory Council

##### 1.1: The Finance Advisory Council definition
The Finance Advisory Council is a group of Finance Actors that have been approved by Maker Governance to carry out advisory work related to improving the content of the Finance Scope Framework.

##### 1.2: Finance Advisory Council membership management
Members of the Advisory Council are directly approved by Maker Governance through a governance poll, and must fulfil specific criteria.
* **1.2.1:** The Finance Facilitators must ensure that potential Advisory Council Members can apply to be approved by Maker Governance, using an open process with clear instructions.
---
* **1.2.2:** Advisory Council Members must be Finance actors that are not involved in any business activity that could result in a conflict of interest, either directly or indirectly. They must also have relevant skills for providing professional expert input on the content that the Finance Scope is covering.
---
* **1.2.3:** The Finance Facilitators must periodically, when it is relevant, review the Advisory Council Applications, and if they find applications that are suitable, bring them to a vote through an MKR governance poll. Approved Advisory Council Members are added to **10.2.3.1:**.
---
* **1.2.4:** The Finance Facilitators may, if they deem it necessary, hold a vote to remove an Advisory Council Member. If an Advisory Council Member has not done any paid work for the Scope for at least 1 year, then the Finance Facilitators can choose to remove them at will, if they deem it necessary.
---
* **1.2.5:** The current approved Advisory Council Members are recorded in the soft element **1.2.5.1**.
	* **1.2.5.1:**
	
¤¤¤

**Current list of Advisory Council Members:**
* N/A

¤¤¤

##### 1.3: Finance Advisory Council projects and funding
The Advisory Council is paid on a project basis to do specific work that improves all or specific parts of the Scope Framework.
* **1.3.1:** Each Quarter, if they deem it necessary, the Finance Facilitators must solicit proposals and find one or more suitable Advisory Council Members to perform a project that will result in output that can be used to improve the Scope Framework. This work output will be presented to the CVC Subcommittee Meetings as the starting point for the CVC Scope Framework Position Documents. As many CVCs as possible should be supported this way, prioritized by the Finance Facilitators.
---
* **1.3.2:** In case an ambiguous, uncertain or challenging situation arises related to the Scope Framework, the Finance Facilitators may approach one or more Advisory Council Members to perform a reactive project that aims to specify the language of the Scope Framework to take into account the specific situation. The Finance Facilitators can then directly propose the change to the Scope Framework in a weekly governance poll, quickly resolving the challenge.
---
* **1.3.3:** The Advisory Council may not produce work output that is directly compatible with the formatting of the Scope Framework. In this case the Finance Facilitators must either transcribe it themselves, or hire an Ecosystem Actor to perform the transcription. This role does not require preapproval by Maker Governance.
---
* **1.3.4:** The Finance Facilitators may also produce advisory input on the content of the Scope Framework themselves, as long as it is focused on improving process and governance content. They are prohibited from providing unilateral input on expert subject matter content.
---
* **1.3.5:** The Finance Facilitators have a budget available to pay for Advisory Council Projects per quarter. All spending must be limited to only what is deemed necessary and with a high probability of producing clearly measurable value, and this must be transparently be accounted for in a forum post at least a week before any transaction occurs.
	* **1.3.5.1:**

¤¤¤

The Advisory Council project budget is up to 0 Dai per quarter. It is accessible as a keg that refills at a linear rate of 0 per 3 months, and has a maximum limit of 0.

¤¤¤

#### 2: The Implementation of the Finance Scope Framework through Software
The Finance Facilitators must in collaboration with the CVC Subcommittees, periodically review possibilities of integrating DAO toolkit innovation into the processes and content of the Scope Framework.

#### 3: Smart Burn Engine management

##### 3.1: Smart Burn engine definition
The Smart Burn engine is the smart contract system that uses excess Dai in the Surplus Buffer to improve the liquidity of MKR to boost the its ability to act as a backstop for Dai and improve the Stability of the Dai Stablecoin. It initially is implemented through the Elixir Module defined in *Protocol Engineering 5.2.1*.

##### 3.2: Smart Burn Engine parameters
The amount of Dai in the Surplus Buffer that causes the Smart Burn Engine to activate, and the rate at which it uses the Dai to improve MKR liquidity, are determined by two parameters set by this Article.
* **3.2.1:** The Surplus Buffer Excess Level determines the amount of Dai necessary for the Smart Burn Engine to activate.
	* **3.2.1.1:** The Surplus Buffer Excess Level is 50 million Dai.
* **3.2.2:** The Rate Of MKR Accumulation determines how much Dai is used to accumulate MKR per unit of system time. Since the Elixir Module pairs the accumulated MKR with Dai directly from the Surplus Buffer, the effective rate of spending from the Surplus Buffer is approximately twice the Rate Of Accumulation. 
	* **3.2.2.1:** The Rate Of MKR Accumulation is 100 million Dai per year.

#### 4: Project Budgets management

##### 4.1: Project Budgets definition
Project Budgets are elements in the Scope Frameworks that define a budget implementation, giving the Scope Facilitators access to drawing Dai and/or MKR from a keg or another smart contract system, in order to fund projects. The projects that are funded must be chosen to meet a specific objective that is defined in the context of the Project Budget, typically within the same article, and other related articles.

##### 4.2: Project Budgets overview
The Finance Facilitators must ensure that all Project Budgets across all Scope Frameworks are tracked and reflected in this section.

### MIP112c3: Responsible Facilitators

The Responsible Facilitators of the Finance Scope Framework are defined in MIP113c2.6.1.2.1A.

### MIP112c4: Scope Framework Articles Modification Subproposal Process

During the Pregame the Scope Framework articles can be modified through the Monthly Governance Cycle using a MIP102c2 subproposal.