# MIP14: Protocol DAI Transfer

## Preamble
```
MIP#: 14
Title: Protocol DAI Transfer
<<<<<<< HEAD
Author(s): @LongForWisdom @jtathmann
=======
Author(s): @LongForWisdom, @jtathmann
>>>>>>> 1087100e6efc5cead29d36dd6ce0bb4efbba808a
Contributors: 
Type: Process
Status: Request for Comments (RFC)
Date Proposed: 2020-08-27
Date Ratified: <yyyy-mm-dd>
Dependencies: MIP0
Replaces: N/A
```
## References
**[MIP14c2-Subproposal-Template.md](MIP14c2-Subproposal-Template.md)**
**[MIP14c4-Subproposal-Template.md](MIP14c4-Subproposal-Template.md)**

## Sentence Summary

MIP14 defines a generic process for transfering DAI from the Maker Protocol to a target ethereum address.

## Paragraph Summary

MIP14 defines a generic process for transfering DAI from the Maker Protocol to a target ethereum address. This process is a fallback method of transferring value from the protocol in the event that a more specific process does not exist to do so. 

## Component Summary

**MIP14c1: Considerations Regarding Protocol DAI Transfers**  
A component which outlines the various considerations that should be made before transferring DAI out of the protocol using MIP14c2.

**MIP14c2: Protocol DAI Transfer Process**  
A process component that allows Maker Governance to transfer DAI from the Maker Protocol to a target ethereum address.

**MIP14c3: Protocol DAI Transfer List**  
A list component that lists the previous direct DAI transfers that have been made by the protocol in the past.

**MIP14c4: Protocol DAI Transfer Ceiling**

A process component that allows governance to define and modify the total amount of DAI that can be transferred from the protocol using MIP14’

## Motivation

Giving governance the ability to use the value generated by the Maker Protocol is beneficial for two main reasons:
- It allows Maker Governance to incentivise actions taken to improve the protocol.
- It reduces Maker Governance's reliance on the Maker Foundation.

Less reliance on the Foundation moves the protocol towards decentralization. Creating a process to allow Maker Governance to spend the value accrued by the protocol empowers Maker Governance to build and improve the protocol in the future.

## Specification / Proposal Details

**MIP14c1: Considerations Regarding Protocol DAI Transfers**  
There are several important considerations to take into account before transferring value out of the Maker Protocol.
- Transfer of DAI from the protocol to an external address that is not controlled by Maker Governance is a one-way operation.
- Transfer of DAI from the protocol will take DAI from the surplus buffer if available.
- If there is insufficient DAI available in the surplus buffer unbacked DAI will be created and FLOP auctions will be able to be triggered immediately.
- If there is a more specific process MIP that allows DAI transfers that is more appropriate to the use case, use that process instead.

---

**MIP14c2: Protocol DAI Transfer Process**  
MIP14c2 is a Process MIP component that allows Maker Governance to transfer DAI from the Maker Protocol to a target ethereum address. Note that MIP14c2 subproposals are technical subproposals, they define executive code that transfers DAI from the Maker Protocol to one or more target addresses.

If a MIP14c2 subproposal is Accepted, The DAI Transfer is appended to the list in MIP14c3 by a MIP Editor.

MIP14c2 subproposals have parameters that depend on the total amount of DAI to be transferred (even if split among multipe target addresses) according to the following logic:

**< 10,000 DAI Transfer**
- **Feedback Period:** 0 full weeks
- **Frozen Period:** 0 full weeks

**10,000 - 100,000 DAI Transfer**
- **Feedback Period:** 4 full weeks
- **Frozen Period:** 1 full week

**> 100,000 DAI Transfer**
- **Feedback Period:** 12 full weeks
- **Frozen Period:** 4 full weeks

If a MIP14c2 subproposal would result in a FLOP auction, Governance Facilitator(s) will use established communication channels to ensure the community is informed

MIP14c2 subproposals must use the template located at **[MIP14c2-Subproposal-Template.md](MIP14c2-Subproposal-Template.md)**. This template is considered ratified once this MIP moves to Accepted status.

---

**MIP14c3: Protocol DAI Transfer List**  
This list can be amended through subproposals created under MIP14c2.

**List Entry Template**
Entries into this list should follow the following template:
```
Reason:
Sub-proposal Number: #
Date Ratified: (yyyy-mm-dd)
Amount Transferred:
Recipient Address:
Total DAI Processed by MIP14 to date:
```

**Historical Transfer List**
There are currently no historical transfers. Below is an example transfer which should be removed (as should this paragraph) when the first ratified transfer is added to this list .
```
Reason: Funding Chocolate for Governance Facilitators
Sub-proposal Number: MIP14c1-SP0
Date Ratified: 2020-02-30
Amount Transferred: 100,000 DAI
Recipient Address: 0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000
Total Dai Processed by MIP14 to date: 100,000
```

---

**MIP14c4: Protocol DAI Transfer Ceiling** 

MIP14c4 sets the maximum amount of DAI that can be transferred in total from the protocol using this process.  MIP14c2-subproposals will not be eligible if they cause the historic amount of DAI transferred from the protocol to exceed the ceiling, which will be initially set to 250,000 DAI and can be modified by MIP14c4 subproposal. 

**DAI Transfer Ceiling Adjustment
- **Feedback Period:** 4 full weeks
- **Frozen period:** 1 full week

