# Governance Scope Bounded Mutable Alignment Artifact

## Preamble

```
MIP#: 999
Title: Governance Scope Bounded Mutable Alignment Artifact
Author(s): @rune
Contributors:
Tags: endgame, scope-framework
Type: General
Status: Accepted
Date Proposed: 2023-02-06
Date Ratified: 2023-03-27
Dependencies:
Replaces:
Ratification Poll URL: https://vote.makerdao.com/polling/Qmbndmkr
Forum URL: https://forum.makerdao.com/t/mip113-the-arbitration-scope-framework/19700
```

## 0: The Governance Scope

The Governance Scope covers rules that regulate the critical balance of power, and adjudicate on appeals processes related to misalignment in the ecosystem.

## 1: Scope Improvement

### 1.1: The Governance Advisory Council

The Governance Advisory Council is a group of Ecosystem Actors that have been approved by Maker Governance to carry out advisory work related to improving the content of the Governance Scope Artifact.

#### 1.1.1: Governance Advisory Council Membership Management

Members of the Advisory Council are directly approved by Maker Governance through a governance poll, and must fulfill specific criteria.

##### 1.1.1.1

The Governance Facilitators must ensure that potential Advisory Council Members can apply to be approved by Maker Governance, using an open process with clear instructions as per *1.1.1.3*.

##### 1.1.1.2

Advisory Council Members must be Ecosystem Actors that are not involved in any business, political, or other governance-related activity that could result in a conflict of interest, either directly or indirectly. They must also have relevant skills for providing professional expert input on the content that the Governance Scope is covering.

##### 1.1.1.3

The Governance Facilitators must periodically, when it is relevant, review the Advisory Council Applications, and if they find applications that are suitable, bring them to a vote through an MKR governance poll. When Advisory Council Applications are posted on the Maker Forum, which must follow the template as per *1.1.2.4.1A*, the Governance Facilitators have a review period of 30 days. During this review period, the applicant must host a Community Q&A and shall answer as many questions and doubts as possible.

###### 1.1.1.3.1

The Governance Facilitators can extend this deadline, if necessary, by 15 days, provided they posted the justification in the Maker Forum.

###### 1.1.1.3.2

Once the review period is ended, the Governance Facilitators must publish the response to the application on the Forum, along with a description of the reasoning behind the decision. If approved, the application will continue with the Governance Process and proceed to a vote as per *1.1.1.3*.

###### 1.1.1.3.3

Upon a successful vote, the Governance Facilitators must arrange a service contract with the Advisory Council member, which must be made public. Approved Advisory Council Members are added to *1.1.1.6.1A*.

###### 1.1.1.3.4

Approved Advisory Council members have a term of service of 18 months from the time they are approved by Maker Governance. If desired, the Advisory Council Member can submit a new application for re-election when their term has between 60 and 30 days remaining. The re-election application must also fulfill *1.1.2* requirements and will open a new review period of 30 days where the Maker Community can provide feedback. The applicant shall again host a Community Q&A and respond to as many questions and doubts as possible. If approved, the re-election application will continue with the Governance Process and proceed to a vote as per *1.1.1.3*.

##### 1.1.1.4

The Governance Facilitators may, if they deem it necessary, trigger a vote to remove an Advisory Council Member. If an Advisory Council Member has not done any paid work for the Scope for at least 1 year, then the Governance Facilitators can choose to remove them at will, if they deem it necessary.

##### 1.1.1.5: Governance Advisory Council Requirements

###### 1.1.1.5.1

Governance Advisory Council members can be individuals, groups of people, legal entities, or companies. They can be pseudonymous or known entities. Governance Advisory Council members must be aligned with the long-term goals of MakerDAO Endgame. The Governance Scope Advisory Council is crucial in this stage of changes that Maker Governance is going through. This council should be composed of highly skilled entities who can quickly adapt to constant changes. They should have or be willing to attain a deep understanding of the Maker Ecosystem and its endgame goals. They should also be aligned with the Atlas and Scope Artifacts. Ideally, the council should include at least one external member who may not be familiar with Maker initially but exhibits a quick learning aptitude. The addition of an external member could provide an unbiased viewpoint and facilitate out-of-the-box thinking.

###### 1.1.1.5.2

Desired competencies for members of the Governance Advisory Council, as many of the following as possible:

1. Deep understanding of MakerDAO, both at the protocol and governance level.
2. Deep and proven thought leadership in the field of decentralized governance, common good stewardship or other processes that coordinate a very large number of independent and often unpaid actors.
3. Hands-on experience in running a DAO or another plurality protocol. Examples include DeSoc movement, Twitter Community Notes, and Wikipedia.
4. Specializations in any of the following fields: political science - particularly specializing in power dynamics, international trade, law, psychology, business administration, philosophy - ideally specializing in game theory, and any other science that can benefit governance.
5. Deep understanding of voting systems and their effects on candidate selection.
6. Experience in people and resource management.
7. Leadership skills and ability to handle pressure.
8. Strong reading comprehension, excellent writing skills, and the ability to interpret whitepapers or large documents. Proven ability to communicate well and distill complex matters into simple, applicable terms, even under pressure.
9. Deep understanding of consensus systems and game theory.
10. Longstanding experience in moderation of high velocity and/or high impact forums or chats.
11. Understanding of legal philosophy or arbitration processes.

##### 1.1.1.6

The current approved Governance Advisory Council Members are recorded in *1.1.1.6.1A*.

###### 1.1.1.6.1A

¤¤¤

Current list of Advisory Council Members:

N/A

¤¤¤

#### 1.1.2: Governance Advisory Council Recognition

##### 1.1.2.1

In order to be eligible for the Governance Advisory Council as per *1.1.1.3*, an Ecosystem Actor must post a recognition submission message publicly on the Maker Governance Forum.

##### 1.1.2.2

The submission message must be cryptographically signed by the Ecosystem Actor address.

##### 1.1.2.3

The cryptographically signed Governance Advisory Council Recognition Submission Messages must contain the information specified in *1.1.2.3.1* and *1.1.2.3.2*.

###### 1.1.2.3.1

The following text must be included: “[Name] Governance Advisory Council Recognition"

###### 1.1.2.3.2

A timestamp recording the time and date that the message was signed.

##### 1.1.2.4

The submission message must follow the template *1.1.2.4.1A*

##### 1.1.2.4.1

```
    Title: [Name] Governance Advisory Council Recognition Submission
    [Ecosystem Actor Ethereum address]
    [Cryptographically signed Advisory Council Recognition Submission Message]
    Applicant's name: [Company, team, or individual]
    Any other relevant identifying details:
    Twitter:
    Website:
    Email:
    Maker Forum:
    Telegram:
    LinkedIn:
    Discord:
    Github:
    Other:
    Presentation: [Introduction]
    Ethos and Vision:
    Team: [Founders and team members. Brief description of their skills and backgrounds]
    Services: [What is your company specialized in? What kind of services do you offer?]
    Experience: [A detailed history of relevant previous experience]
    Client References: [Who are your clients, what projects have you done and can you show the results of any of them?]
    Explain how your skills will contribute to improving the selected Scope: [Which specific aspect of the Scope do you intend to enhance, and what is the rationale behind your choice? How do you plan to     improve the chosen aspect? Provide milestones, if applicable].
    Payment Details: [How shall the compensation for your contributions be structured?  How many hours shall the work entail? Detail as much as possible]
    Emergency Availability: [Would you be available on short notice to provide advisory support in the event of an unforeseen emergency? How short of a notice? What would be your hourly rate for emergency     advisory services rendered?]
```

#### 1.1.3: Governance Advisory Council Projects and Funding

The Advisory Council is paid on a project basis to do specific work that improves all or specific parts of the Scope Framework.

##### 1.1.3.1

Entities are encouraged to submit applications with the intention of enhancing a specific portion of the Scope Framework. Any entity can notice a problem in the Scope or something that can and should be improved and apply to undergo a process to suggest improvements. There are also sometimes specific pieces of advisory work listed in 1.1.3.2 that can be taken on by applicants. The Governance Facilitators should diligently encourage participants possessing relevant areas of expertise to actively engage in this process to the fullest extent possible. Accordingly, once this MIP is successfully passed, it is imperative that the Governance Facilitators promptly post a Request for Applicants to the forum within a period of 30 days. The Governance Facilitators may choose to utilize a Peer-to-Peer recruiting process, which involves allocating a portion of the Governance Advisory Council budget to incentivize ecosystem participants and community members to actively seek out applicants, providing comprehensive explanations of the process.

##### 1.1.3.2: Advisory Work for Governance Advisory Council Members

None yet identified.
