# MIP111: The Infrastructure Scope Framework

## Preamble
```
MIP#: 111
Title: The Infrastructure Scope Framework
Author(s): @rune
Contributors:
Tags: endgame, scope-framework
Type: General
Status: RFC
Date Proposed: 2023-02-06
Date Ratified: <yyyy-mm-dd>
Dependencies:
Replaces:
Forum URL: https://forum.makerdao.com/t/mip111-the-infrastructure-scope-framework/19698
Ratification Poll URL:
```

## Sentence Summary

TBD

## Paragraph Summary

TBD

## Component Summary

TBD

## Motivation

TBD

## Specification

## MIP111c1: Preamble

The Infrastructure Scope Framework covers Keepers, infrastructure tools, Maker teleport, Oracle needs for maker core and Oracle standards for SubDAOs, and other infrastructure related topics.

## MIP111c2: Scope Framework Articles

## 0: Definitions

## TODO

## 1: The Infrastructure Advisory Council

#### 1.1: The Infrastructure Advisory Council definition
The Infrastructure Advisory Council is a group of Infrastructure Actors that have been approved by Maker Governance to carry out advisory work related to improving the content of the Infrastructure Scope Framework.

#### 1.2: Infrastructure Advisory Council membership management
Members of the Advisory Council are directly approved by Maker Governance through a governance poll, and must fulfill specific criteria.
* **1.2.1:** The Responsible Facilitators must ensure that potential Advisory Council Members can apply to be approved by Maker Governance, using an open process with clear instructions.
---
* **1.2.2:** Advisory Council Members must be Infrastructure actors that are not involved in any business activity that could result in a conflict of interest, either directly or indirectly. They must also have relevant skills for providing professional expert input on the content that the Infrastructure Scope is covering.
---
* **1.2.3:** The Responsible Facilitators must periodically, when it is relevant, review the Advisory Council Applications, and if they find applications that are suitable, bring them to a vote through an MKR governance poll. Approved Advisory Council Members are added to **10.2.3.1:**.
---
* **1.2.4:** The Responsible Facilitators may, if they deem it necessary, hold a vote to remove an Advisory Council Member. If an Advisory Council Member has not done any paid work for the Scope for at least 1 year, then the Responsible Facilitators can choose to remove them at will, if they deem it necessary.
---
* **1.2.5:** The current approved Advisory Council Members are recorded in the soft element **1.2.5.1**.
	* **1.2.5.1:**
¤¤¤
Current list of Advisory Council Members:
N/A
¤¤¤

#### 1.3: Infrastructure Advisory Council projects and funding
The Advisory Council is paid on a project basis to do specific work that improves all or specific parts of the Scope Framework.
* **1.3.1:** Each Quarter, if they deem it necessary, the Responsible Facilitators must solicit proposals and find one or more suitable Advisory Council Members to perform a project that will result in output that can be used to improve the Scope Framework. This work output will be presented to the CVC Subcommittee Meetings as the starting point for the CVC Scope Framework Position Documents. As many CVCs as possible should be supported this way, prioritized by the Responsible Facilitators.
---
* **1.3.2:** In case an ambiguous, uncertain or challenging situation arises related to the Scope Framework, the Responsible Facilitator may approach one or more Advisory Council Members to perform a reactive project that aims to specify the language of the Scope Framework to take into account the specific situation. The Responsible Facilitator can then directly propose the change to the Scope Framework in a weekly governance poll, quickly resolving the challenge.
---
* **1.3.3:** The Advisory Council may not produce work output that is directly compatible with the formatting of the Scope Framework. In this case the Responsible Facilitator must either transcribe it themselves, or hire an Ecosystem Actor to perform the transcription. This role does not require preapproval by Maker Governance.
---
* **1.3.4:** The Responsible Facilitators may also produce advisory input on the content of the Scope Framework themselves, as long as it is focused on improving process and governance content. They are prohibited from providing unilateral input on expert subject matter content.
---
* **1.3.5:** The Responsible Facilitators have a budget available to pay for Advisory Council Projects per quarter. All spending must be limited to only what is deemed necessary and with a high probability of producing clearly measurable value, and this must be transparently be accounted for in a forum post at least a week before any transaction occurs.
	* **1.3.5.1:**
¤¤¤
The Advisory Council project budget is up to 0 Dai per quarter. It is accessible as a keg that refills at a linear rate of 0 per 3 months, and has a maximum limit of 0.
¤¤¤

## 2: The Implementation of the Infrastructure Scope Framework through Software
The Responsible Facilitators must in collaboration with the CVC Subcommittees, periodically review possibilities of integrating DAO toolkit innovation into the processes and content of the Scope Framework.


## MIP111c3: Responsible Facilitators

The Responsible Facilitators of the Infrastructure Scope are responsible for adhering to the contents of the Scope Framework elements.

The Responsible Facilitators also have the governance privilege to interpret, trigger or use any of the processes described in the Scope Framework elements.

During the Pregame, the Responsible Facilitators are defined as the Core Unit facilitators of the Core Units that are listed as Responsible Facilitator Core Units.

The Responsible Facilitator Core Units for the Infrastructure Scope are defined in MIP111c3.

## MIP111c4: Active Responsible Facilitator Core Unit list

The current active Responsible Facilitator Core Units of the Infrastructure Scope are:
* TBD

## MIP111c5: Active Responsible Facilitator Core Unit list modification sub proposal process

This component is a sub proposal process component that, if approved by Maker Governance, modifies the state of MIP111c4 from line 14 until the end of the MIP Component.

## MIP111c6: Scope Framework Articles modification Sub Proposal process

During the pregame the Scope Framework articles can be modified through the Monthly Governance Cycle.
