# MIP102: Endgame MIP Amendment and Removal Process

## Preamble

```
MIP#: 102
Title: Endgame MIP Amendment and Removal Process
Author(s): @rune
Contributors:
Tags: endgame, pregame, constitution-mip-set
Type: General
Status: Accepted
Date Proposed: 2023-02-06
Date Ratified: 2023-03-27
Dependencies:
Replaces:
Ratification Poll URL: https://vote.makerdao.com/polling/Qmbndmkr
Forum URL: https://forum.makerdao.com/t/mip102-endgame-mip-amendment-and-removal-process/19684
```

## References

* [MIP102c2 Subproposal Template](https://github.com/makerdao/mips/blob/master/MIP102/MIP102c2-Subproposal-Template.md)
* [MIP102c3 Subproposal Template](https://github.com/makerdao/mips/blob/master/MIP102/MIP102c3-Subproposal-Template.md)

## Sentence Summary

MIP102 defines processes for the amendment and removal of accepted MIPs for the purposes of implementing the Endgame.

## Paragraph Summary

The Amendment and Removal Process-MIP outlines the process for arbitrary changes to MIPs, and removal of MIPs. It is empowered to make the changes that are required for the Maker Constitution to be properly integrated into Maker Governance.

## Component Summary

**MIP102c1: Purpose Description**  
Suggests the purpose of the amendment and removal processes and possible reasons for using each process.

**MIP102c2: Amendment Process for MIPs**  
A process component which defines a method and template for the amendment of an accepted MIP.

**MIP102c3: MIP Removal Process**  
A process component which defines a method and template for the removal of an accepted MIP.

**MIP102c4: Simultaneous Edit Resolution Process**
A process component which defines the process that must be followed if multiple MIP102c2 subproposals are passed that seek to edit the same component, or components, of a MIP or Alignment Artifact within the same Governance Cycle.

## Motivation

For the implementation of Endgame, the Maker Constitution will take over most governance processes and functions, however some existing MIPs will be required to stay in place to make the transition easier and save work. This MIP provides the necessary rules to enable arbitrary changes to existing MIPs in order to make them compatible with the Maker Constitution.

## Specification / Proposal Details

### MIP102c1: Purpose Description

#### Amendments
MIP Amendments that preserve the MIP number can be performed to modify any aspect of an existing MIP, including MIP0. There are no restrictions on how an existing MIP can be amended.

Multiple amendments to multiple MIPs are allowed to be submitted as a single subproposal.

#### Removals

MIP102 also enables the removal of one or multiple MIPs that are inactive as a part of the Endgame transition.

Multiple MIPs may be removed in a single MIP Removal subproposal.

### MIP102c2: Amendment Process for MIPs

MIP102c2 is a Process MIP component that regulates the amendment of one or multiple Accepted MIPs. MIP102c2 subproposals have the following parameters:

- **Default Feedback Period**: 1 month
- **Frozen Period**: 1 week
- **Governance Cycle**: Monthly
- **Other Requirements**: None.

All MIP102c2 subproposals must use the template located at **[MIP102c2-Subproposal-Template.md](https://github.com/makerdao/mips/blob/master/MIP102/MIP102c2-Subproposal-Template.md)**.

When making a MIP102c2 Subproposal to edit one or more Scope Bounded Mutable Alignment Artifacts, the proposer must specify whether it is an **Article 1 Edit** or a **General Edit**. If the MIP102c2 is an Article 1 edit, the only parts of the Scope Bounded Mutable Alignment Artifacts that are changed are their Article 1 elements, regardless else the Subproposal specifies in edits for those MIPs. If the MIP102c2 Subproposal is a General Edit, then it cannot modify the Article 1 elements of the Scope Bounded Mutable Alignment Artifacts and will leave them intact. Article 1 Edits and General Edits can overlap and coexist, meaning if an Article 1 Edit and a General Edit are both approved in the same monthly governance cycle, the changes from both Subproposals are merged together and applied.

MIP102c2 subproposals are not allowed to include language that aims to prevent other proposals from editing the same component of an Alignment Artifact within the same Governance Cycle. If multiple simultaneous MIP102c2 subproposals that seek to edit the same part of a MIP or Alignment Artifact are approved by voters, the procedure documented in MIP102c4 must be followed.

### MIP102c3: MIP Removal Process

MIP102c3 is a Process MIP component that allows the removal of one or multiple Accepted MIPs. MIP102c3 subproposals have the following parameters:

- **Default Feedback Period**: 1 month
- **Frozen Period**: 1 week
- **Governance Cycle**: Monthly
- **Other Requirements**: None.

MIP102c3 subproposals must use the template located at **[MIP102c3-Subproposal-Template.md](https://github.com/makerdao/mips/blob/master/MIP102/MIP102c3-Subproposal-Template.md)**.

### MIP102c4: Simultaneous Edit Resolution Process

Where voters approve multiple MIP102c2 Subproposals that seek to edit the same component or components of a MIP or Alignment Artifact within the same Governance Cycle, the process contained in MIP102c4 must be followed. This process only applies to the specific components that are being simultaneously edited. Other amended components that do not have edits in simultaneous proposals may be merged, unless they are dependent on the component that does have simultaneous edits. The process is as follows:

- Where simultaneous edits are _non-conflicting, logically compatible_, Governance Facilitators will consolidate them into a single edit either by stitching them together in the affected component or by stringing one after the other as a new component. Any action taken by the Governance Facilitators in this regard will be documented publicly and preferably be available prior to the end date of the relevant ratification polls.
- Where simultaneous edits are _conflicting, logically incompatible_ and cannot be coherently reconciled, it falls to voters to decide which of the conflicting subproposals they wish to accept. If there are two conflicting subproposals, a subsequent binary vote is appropriate. In the event there are more than two conflicting subproposals, the Governance Facilitators may choose a suitable polling method that allows voters to choose between multiple options. The difference between the conflicting amendments must be clearly presented so that voters can make an informed choice on their preferred option.

Any poll resulting from MIP102c4 will take place during the Weekly Governance Cycle immediately following the closure of the ratification polls and last for three days.
